Chapter One: Make a Start
------  ------------------
This chapter will walk you through the process of making a start in Python coding. You will learn how to download and install Python on your operating system. You will also learn how to start the editor and write a code in Python text editor.
The first thing you should know about is setting up a Python environment on your operating system. Python is installed differently on different operating systems. There are currently two available versions of Python which are Python 2 and Python 3. Each programming language keeps evolving as developers add to it new concepts and ideas. Python developers have taken a step further by making regular developments to the language, making it more powerful and versatile as well. You can install both versions of your operating system.
Python 3 Installation
Python is one of the most widely used programming languages that were first launched in 1991. Since then Python has gained immense popularity. It also is considered one of the most popular as well as flexible programming languages. Unlike Linux, Windows operating systems don’t have Python preinstalled by default. However, you always can install Python on the Windows operating system is a very easy step.
The prerequisites of installing Python 3 on your Windows system are that you must have Windows 10 installed on the system and have admin privileges. Also, you should have a command prompt running on the system. The next prerequisite is the availability of a remote desktop app. You can use it if you are planning to install Python on a remote Windows server.
The first step in the installation process is selecting the version you want to install. In this case, we are aiming at downloading Python 3. You should visit the official Python website python.org and download Python 3 installer for Windows. Now run the same on your system. As you are just getting started on learning the Python language, I recommend that you download and install Python 2 and Python 3 versions to test old and new projects simultaneously.
Executable Installer
You should download and install Python executable installer on your Windows operating system. The first step in this regard is to open your internet browser and move to the Downloads section of python.org. Make sure that you download and install only the version that has an executable installer available for Windows. The approximate download size is about 25 MB. If your Windows is a 32-bit operating system, you should select Windows x86 executable installer. If it is 64-bit, you should select Windows x86-64 executable installer. However, even if you install the wrong version, it is easy to uninstall it and reinstall it once again.
Run It
When the executable installer of Python has been downloaded, you need to run it. Select Install launcher for all users. This will ensure that all users on your system will be able to use it. Don’t forget to tick Add Python 3.8 to the PATH box. This links the interpreter to the path of execution and facilitates programming. Older versions don’t display this option.
In the next step, click on Install Now. When you have installed it, you will see that you will get Python IDLE and Pip. You also can verify Python on your system by navigating to the directory in which Python was installed or by entering the word Python in the search bar. You also can check it through Command Prompt by the name of the directory.
If you opt to install Python 2, you might not get Pip installed with it. Pip is a powerful package and is very helpful in building software and machine learning models. Therefore, you should make sure that the version you have installed has got Pip installed on it.
You can also confirm if Pip is installed on your operating system or not by opening the Start menu and typing the word cmb in the search bar. The command will open the Command Prompt application in which you can write pip –v. If the pip is installed on your system, you will see a line that starts with pip 19.0.3. Otherwise, the system will say that it doesn’t recognize pip as an external or internal command. When you open the Python interpreter or IDLE, it will have text like the following:
Python 3.8.5 (tags/v3.8.5:580fbb0, Jul 20 2020, 15:57:54) [MSC v.1924 64 bit (AMD64)] on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license()" for more information.
>>>
On the top is written the version of Python. If you have installed Python 2, the text will be as follows:
Python 2.7.8 (default, Jun 30 2014, 16:08:48) [MSC v.1500 64 bit (AMD64)] on win32
Type "copyright", "credits" or "license()" for more information.
>>> 
